% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[
]{article}
\title{Dissertation}
\author{Ryan Pollard}
\date{03/08/2021}

\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{iftex}
\ifPDFTeX
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{xcolor}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\IfFileExists{bookmark.sty}{\usepackage{bookmark}}{\usepackage{hyperref}}
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={Dissertation},
  pdfauthor={Ryan Pollard},
  hidelinks,
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}
\urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-\maxdimen} % remove section numbering
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{array}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{wrapfig}
\usepackage{float}
\usepackage{colortbl}
\usepackage{pdflscape}
\usepackage{tabu}
\usepackage{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}
\usepackage{makecell}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\ifLuaTeX
  \usepackage{selnolig}  % disable illegal ligatures
\fi

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\tableofcontents
\pagebreak

\hypertarget{abstract}{%
\section{Abstract}\label{abstract}}

\hypertarget{text-analysis-and-nlp-a-background}{%
\section{1. Text Analysis and NLP: A
Background}\label{text-analysis-and-nlp-a-background}}

Data is becoming increasingly more important and available to businesses
and individuals alike. Businesses are generating and storing so much
data and as a result there is a desire to investigate if this data could
be of use. For example, a business might sell their goods on Amazon and
receive thousands of customer reviews a day. Data is traditionally
thought of as being spreadsheets with cells being populated by numbers,
however, the textual-review data, as used as an example above, also has
its uses. In the case of reviews,it represents an sign of the quality of
that product. This ``sign'' is in essence a piece of data. In the same
way, social media represents a vessel of data that represents the
thoughts and feelings of it's users; that is, there are reams of textual
data that indicate a feeling and opinion about a given topic. From
casually browsing Twitter for example, a few tweets can be read
regarding the latest news event and after reading five to ten tweets it
could be concludde how the users of twitter are feeling about this
event.

Twitter is one of the most popular social media platforms and plays a
huge role in influencing and expressing public opinion. About 500
million tweets are published everyday - where each tweet is a message
limited to 288 characters. It's an important tool to understand peoples'
emotion - this is done via ``Sentiment analysis'' of the tweets. It's
also useful in discovering the most discussed topics and this is
explored using statistical techniques known as ``Topic Modeling''.

That act of browsing and reading of tweets is effectively a data
gathering exercise to discern the opinion of the people. Since language
is the way humans interface and naturally share data, it's completely
natural to humans to read these words on a screen, coming from multiple
tweets, and form a single opinion about how people must be feeling about
that topic. For example, looking at tweets that speak about tax
increases, ten tweets may be read, seven of which may criticise this
change in policy, two of which may praise it, and one that is in between
those two feelings. From this a reader of these tweets can conclude that
the attitude to increasing taxes is largely negative, with seven of the
ten tweets carrying negative connotations.

In addition to tweets being useful in gauging opinion of it's users, as
time goes on more and more people are using twitter - meaning there can
be varied opinions on a particular topic. With the advent of smartphones
across the globe and the ease of access of internet, the volume users
voluntarily inputting text data has exploded; adding to the importance
of being able to analyse this data in a statistically structured way.

In terms of how this data is analysed, the problem with text data is
that it is unstructured - unlike numbers that represent financials or
demographics with set numerical rules; and therefore it is inherently
difficult to work with. Text often is hard to interpret to a machine,
with it's grammar, syntax rules and complex patterns and as a result it
is not straight forward to carry out statistical techniques on text
data.

There are however rigorous statistical techniques that have been
developed that allows text data to be processed statistically. Under the
umbrella known as ``NLP'' - Natural Language Processing, these
techniques aim to understand text-based data. Natural Language
Processing, where a Natural Language is any language that evolved with
humans to communicate, uses the linguistic rules that every language has
in order to extract information from pieces of text. It enables
computers to process and understand human language.

\hypertarget{how-computers-use-text-data}{%
\subsection{1.1 How computers use text
data}\label{how-computers-use-text-data}}

First a definition, a ``document'' is a single separate piece of text.
In the context of tweets, a document would be one tweet. If news
articles were to be analysed, a document would be one article. Documents
comprise a ``corpus'', which is all the documents combined.

Machine learning techniques traditionally need numerical data. A
logistic regression is a simple machine learning tool that can express
the segmentation of a dependent variable with two groups as a function
of its independent variables. It's possible to have exactly the same
framework using text data

In this toy example there ten documents with each document being a
single tweet, five of which give misinformation about Covid-19, and five
of which give true information about Covid-19. The aim is to build a
logistic regression such that the relationship between the text in each
tweet and its label of misinformation/information is obtained. However,a
logistic regression cannot do this because it can only interpret
numerical data. The logical step then is to convert these documents
(tweets, in the example) into numbers. This is done via
``Vectorisation'' of each document. The corpus of documents are then
represented as a matrix where each row a document, having a vector of
numbers and the columns are all the words in the corpus. The numbers in
the matrix represent the amount of times a word in a column appears in a
document (which is a row). Each row then represents all the text in one
of the documents. This process converts text data into numerical data
and as a result machine learning techniques can be used on this matrix.

Creating the matrix above requires certain steps so that it is primed
for statistical analysis to be carried out. The process of splitting
each document into it's individual words is called ``Tokenisation''.
This is a list of words that appear in each document. For each document,
this list of words is vectorised using one of the following techniques:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Bag of Words - a matrix where each word is a column, each row is a
  document (one piece of text data) and the number in each cell is the
  number of times the column's word appears in the document's (row)
  text. See the image below for an example.
\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure}
\includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/16034397439042_surfin bird bow} \caption{A toy example of a bag of words matrix}\label{fig:unnamed-chunk-1}
\end{figure}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\item
  TF-IDF - stands for ``Term Frequency --- Inverse Document Frequency''.
  This generates a matrix that assigns a weight to each word which
  signifies the importance of the word in the document and corpus. This
  is more sophisticated than the Bag of Words approach. The importance
  of a word in each document is based on the amount of times it appears
  in the document and also how rare the word is in the corpus. Rare
  words in document are given a higher weighting as rare words help
  distinguish what topic the document belongs to. For example, if a
  document contains a rare word ``Nuclear'', this is likely to be a good
  indicator that the document is about the topic ``Energy''. If a word
  appears frequently in a document but infrequently across the whole
  corpus, it is given a large weight.
\item
  word2vec - uses a neural network model to learn word associations from
  a large corpus of text. Once trained, such a model can detect
  synonymous words or suggest additional words for a partial sentence.
  This is even more sophisticated than the above as context of the word
  is taken into account.
\end{enumerate}

Using one of these methods to convert a corpus of documents into a
matrix, machine learning techniques can be used in order to classify
documents and other operations.

\hypertarget{applications}{%
\subsection{1.2 Applications}\label{applications}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Machine Translation} - translating text from one language to
  another. This is becoming more accurate with the aid of Deep Learning.
\item
  \textbf{Speech Recognition} - Recognition of vocal language and
  converting it to text.
\item
  \textbf{Question Answering Systems} - For example chatbots often used
  to interface between clientes and businesses. Another example is
  Personal Assistants such as Siri
\item
  \textbf{Contextual Recognition} - Obtaining meaning of words from the
  context of the sentence, not just using the definition of the word.
\item
  \textbf{Text Summarisation} - Taking a large piece of text and
  condensing it but retaining the original meaning .
\item
  \textbf{Text Categorisation} - Classifying texts. For example, perhaps
  given a piece of text, a tweet in this example, analysing the words
  gives rise to ability to classify it as a tweet that contains
  misinformation about Covid-19 to a certain level of accuracy using
  machine learning techniques.
\item
  \textbf{Text Analytics} - Deriving insights from text data. Methods
  include clustering, summarisation, sentiment analysis. An example
  application of this is Spam detection. Statistical techniques are used
  to classify certain emails as spam so they don't reach a user's inbox.
\item
  \textbf{Topic Modelling} - Classifying a corpus of documents into
  topics.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{supervised-and-unsupervised-machine-learning}{%
\subsection{1.3 Supervised and Unsupervised Machine
Learning}\label{supervised-and-unsupervised-machine-learning}}

Supervised machine learning is taking labeled data and using it to
express the relationship between the labels and the independent
variables in the data. In the running example, this would mean taking
twitter data that express an opinion about Covid-19 and manually
labeling them ``misinformation'' if it contains misinformation and
``information'' is it contains real information. The relationship could
then be explored between the text and the labels and this relationship
can be used to predict if a new, unlabelled and unread tweet as having
misinformation to a certain percent of accuracy.

However, since there is exponentially more text information available,
it is extremely inconvenient for these texts to be labeled since it
requires a human to read each text. Therefore it is common to apply
unsupervised (unlabeled) statistical techniques to this type of text
data. There are a family of machine learning algorithms that try to
discover latent hidden structures and patterns in unlabeled text data
from their various attributes and features. Several unsupervised
learning algorithms are also used to reduce the feature space, which is
often reduced data from a higher dimension to one with a lower
dimension. This dimensionality reduction can be seen as taking a large
number of documents and assigning them into a relatively small amount of
groups, where each group has its own topic which describes broadly the
type of tweets the group contains.

\hypertarget{topic-models}{%
\section{2. Topic Models}\label{topic-models}}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\subsection{2.1 Introduction}\label{introduction}}

To serve as an introduction to Topic Model a toy example is considered:
Data comprising twenty thousand tweets expressing opinions about
Covid-19 is availableand using unsupervised machine learning techniques
and the vectorisation of text explained above, the data can be
mathematically expressed and analysed. These tweets can be grouped into
three groups using machine learning algorithms with the following aim:
tweets in group one contains text that refer to Covid-19 cures, group
two contains tweets about Covid-19 vaccines and group three contain
tweets about Covid-19 prevention. These groups can be interpreted to be
topics. To reach this goal, a range of statistical techniques are used
called Topic Models.

Topic models extract the distinguishing concepts, or topics, from the
the corpus (that is, all the documents). It groups up documents into
topics without human intervention and judgment. These topics can include
opinions or facts. The models then use statistical techniques to explore
the hidden and latent structures in the corpus in order to group up
documents, where the hidden structures in the corpus refer to topics.

\hypertarget{methods-for-topic-modeling}{%
\subsection{2.2 Methods for topic
modeling}\label{methods-for-topic-modeling}}

There are various algorithms to carry out Topic Modeling.

The following three methods are explored:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Latent Semantic Indexing
\item
  Latent Dirichlet Allocation
\item
  Non-negative matrix factorization
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{latent-semantic-indexing-lsa}{%
\subsubsection{2.3 Latent Semantic Indexing
(LSA)}\label{latent-semantic-indexing-lsa}}

Latent Semantic Analysis takes the matrix that contains the documents
and terms and decomposes it into a document-topic matrix and topic-term
matrix - this is the TF-IDF matrix explained in Section 1.1. This matrix
will be sparse since it contains all th terms in the corpus and a lot of
terms will not be important in defining the topics. In order to find
only a few topics this matrix needs to undergo dimensionality reduction.
This reduction can be done using truncated Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD). THis is a technique that factorises a matrix into the product of
3 separate matrices, as seen in \ref{fig:lsa_svd}. \(V\) represents the
TF-IDF matrix. The matrix \(\Sigma\) represents the singular values of
\(V\) and to keep the most important topics only the top \(t\) largest
singular values are kept, which means keeping only the first \(t\)
columns of \(U\) and \(V*\). In other words, \(t\) is a hyperparameter
which adjusts the number of topics outputted by the SVD.

\(U\) represents the document-topic matrix, \(V*\) represents the
term-topic matrix. For both matrices the columns represent topics. For
\(U\), the rows represent the document vectores expressed in terms of
topics. The rows in \(V\) represents the term vectors expressed in terms
of topics. The numbers in the cells represent how important the topic is
for the term or document in \(v*\) and \(U\) respectively. In this way,
the documents can be assigned a topic by choosing the highest topic
importance value.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/lsa} 

}

\caption{Singular Value Decomposition of the TF}\label{fig:lsa_svd}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{non-negative-matrix-factorisation}{%
\subsubsection{2.4 Non-negative matrix
factorisation}\label{non-negative-matrix-factorisation}}

One way to find the hidden topics of a corpus is the factorization of
the ``document-term matrix'' - this is the a matrix with the rows being
the documents and the columns being the words in the whole corpus - and
if a docyment contains a particular word in the corpus it gets a value
of 1 in that cell where the column is that particular word. This matrix
has only positive-value elements and so methods from linear algebra can
be used to order to represent the matrix as the product of two other
nonnegative matrices. The original matrix is called V, and the factors
are W and H:

\begin{equation}
V \approx W \cdot H
\end{equation}

In the context of text analytics, both W and H have an interpretation.
The matrix W has the same number of rows as the document-term matrix and
therefore maps documents to topics (document-topic matrix). H has the
same number of columns as features, so it shows how the topics are
constituted of features (topic-feature matrix). The number of topics
(the columns of W and the rows of H) can be chosen arbitrarily. The
smaller this number, the less exact the factorization.

The above two methods are computationally much cheaper than LDA but
lacks in the ability to find multiple topics in single documents - this
ability is gained by adding a Dirichlet prior on top of the data
generating process, as discussed below.

\hypertarget{latent-dirichlet-allocation}{%
\section{3. Latent Dirichlet
Allocation}\label{latent-dirichlet-allocation}}

\hypertarget{lda-introduction}{%
\subsection{3.1 LDA Introduction}\label{lda-introduction}}

LDA considers each document as consisting of a mixture of different
topics and these topics are made up of a mixture of words. To ensure
that the number of topics per document is low and to have only a few
important words constituting the topics, LDA uses a Dirichlet prior in
its statistical process. This is applied both for assigning topics to
documents and for assigning words to the the topics. After these initial
assignments, a generative process begins. It uses the Dirichlet
distributions for topics and words and tries to re-create the words from
the original documents with stochastic sampling. This process has to be
iterated many times and is therefore computationally intensive. The
results can be used to generate documents for any identified topic. For
a given corpus of documents, each document can be represented as a
statistical distribution of a fixed set of topics. LDA assumes that each
document is generated by a statistical generative process governed by a
document's topic distribution, and the topics' word distributions. After
this generative process has taken place and when the documents generated
that most closely resemble the actual documents in the corpus, the topic
distribution of the documents can be observed to assign documents to
topics.

\hypertarget{lda-in-depth}{%
\subsection{3.2 LDA In-Depth}\label{lda-in-depth}}

Topic models are based on the idea that each document, that is each
piece of text, are a mixture of topics. For example, perhaps there is a
news article about electric vehicles and how it impact the economy. In
this example it can be said this document (i.e the article) is a
combination different topics, not just one - it could well be 50\%
``Transport'', 30\% ``Technology'' and 20\% ``Economy''. This
distribution is labelled as \(\theta\).

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{00---Actual-Dissertation_files/figure-latex/plot1-1} 

}

\caption{Example of a multinomial distribution of the Topics in LDA for a single document.}\label{fig:plot1}
\end{figure}

Documents have a probability distribution over topics, as described in
the example. A document chosen at random may have any percent of \(n\)
different topics.

Equally, it can be said a topic is a distribution over words. For
example, the topic transport can be defined by a list of words that
appear in that topic with varying frequencies. For example consider that
the topic ``transport'', for simplicity, comprises three words - car,
bus, roads - ``Car'' appears 70\% of the time for that topic, ``Bus''
10\% and ``Roads'' 20\%. Figure \ref{fig:plot2} shows a toy example of a
word distribution for the topic ``Transport'' in from Figure
\ref{fig:plot1}. The other two topics in Figure \ref{fig:plot1} would
have their own word distributions.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{00---Actual-Dissertation_files/figure-latex/plot2-1} 

}

\caption{Example of a multinomial distribution of the words in a Topic in LDA.}\label{fig:plot2}
\end{figure}

This is analogous to the reality where, if you were to read an article
you might discern it's topic by considering the words used in the
article and also the frequency of the words used in the article to make
the judgment. For example the word ``Car'' would appear more often than
petrol station across all ``Transport'' documents - leading to the
conclusion that the main topic would be indeed ``Transport'' and not
``Energy'' which might be the case if the phrase ``Petrol Station'' were
to be more prevalent.

A topic model is a generative process. The model describes a statistical
procedure through which the observed documents are produced. A
generative process for documents describes how words in documents might
be generated based on variables that are not seen - latent variables. It
aims to find the best set of latent variables that explains the
documents in the corpus. These latent variables dictate the probability
distributions described above in the toy examples.

\hypertarget{the-generative-process-of-lda}{%
\subsection{3.2 The Generative Process of
LDA}\label{the-generative-process-of-lda}}

A document in the corpus can be assumed to be created by first choosing
a distribution over topics - just like how an author might decide he is
going to write about 60\% ``transport'' and 40\% ``technology''. These
two topics are then the distribution of topics per document. After, for
each place where a word appears in the document, a word is chosen from a
distribution of words from the selected topic; where the selected topic
is sampled from the distribution of topics per document. For example,
the topic ``Transport'' is sampled for the first word, and within topic
``Transport'' there is a distribution of words taking the form of 60\%
``Car'' and 40\% ``Bus''. A word is chosen from this distribution and
since car is most likely, for this first word of the document ``Car'' is
chosen. The role of LDA is inferring these topic and word distributions
through which the documents most likely have been generated.

In practice when using LDA, each document is a distribution over many
topics, but typically each document is dominated by one or two topics -
just as in real life where an article typically only has one or two
topics. Each of those topics have also a distribution of many words. For
example a topic may have thousands of words within its word
distribution. This is an important point because, roughly speaking, the
Dirichlet distribution is used to constrain these amount of topics that
define a document, and the amount of words that define a topic, to a
smaller amount. This yields results which are easier to interpret.

This generative process which gives topic and word distributions is
useful - by seeing the distribution of words in a topic the topic can be
given a name. For example if the words ``Fight'' and ``Glove'' were
grouped together in a distribution with 80\% and 20\% probability
respectively, it can easily say that this topic is about boxing.

\hypertarget{notation}{%
\subsubsection{3.2.1 Notation}\label{notation}}

The distribution over words within the document specified by the modelis
given by \begin{equation}
P(w_i) = \sum_{j=1}^{T}P(w_i|z_j =j)P(z_i=j)
\end{equation} where \(P(z_i=j)\) is the probability that the \emph{j}th
topic was chosen for the \emph{i}th word, \(P(w_i|z_j =j)\) isthe
probability of the word \emph{w}\emph{i} under topic \emph{j} and \(T\),
the number of topics.

\hypertarget{the-dirichlet-distribution}{%
\subsection{3.3 The Dirichlet
Distribution}\label{the-dirichlet-distribution}}

\url{https://towardsdatascience.com/dirichlet-distribution-a82ab942a879}

The Dirichlet distribution \(Dir(\alpha)\) is a family of continuous
multivariate probability distributions parameterized by a vector
\(\alpha\) of positive reals. It is a multivariate generalisation of the
Beta distribution. The Dirichlet distribution is a conjugate prior to
many important probability distributions and specifically a conjugate
prior to the multinomial distribution - the distribution LDA uses for
sampling topics and words. The Dirichlet distribution is used in LDA to
sample a multinomial distribution of topics and words. It is useful
because it allows for topics and words to have varying probabilities of
being sampled, allowing for documents to be confined to one to two
topics which is a more natural way to interpret a document.

Multinomial distributions can be drawn from a Dirichlet distribution
which is needed to sample \(\phi\) and \(\theta\), where
\({\phi}^{(j)} = P(z=j)\) is a multinomial distribution over words for
topic \emph{j} and \({\theta}^{(d)} = P(z)\) is a multinomial
distribution over topics for document \emph{d}. These are the latent
variables which ultimately LDA aims to approximate. The parameter
\(\theta\) indicates what topics are important for a particular document
and \(\phi\) indicates what words are important in each topic.

\hypertarget{toy-example-for-te-dirichlet-distribution}{%
\subsubsection{3.3.1 Toy Example for te Dirichlet
Distribution}\label{toy-example-for-te-dirichlet-distribution}}

\url{https://medium.com/@yu.sue.liu} example inspired by

Suppose a six-sided dice is to be manufactured with the outcomes of the
dice being only the numbers one, two and three. If this is a fair die
then the three outcomes with have the same probability of
\(\frac{1}{3}\). The probabilities of the outcomes can be represented by
the vector
\(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}} = (\theta_{1}, \theta_{2}, \theta_{3})\).
Since the sum of these probabilities must be equal to one and none of
the probabilities can be negative, rolling the dice can be described by
a multinomial distribution. Since each \(\theta_{i} \in [0,1]\) this
means the set of allowable values for \(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}\)
is confined to a triangle. The Dirichlet distribution is used to define
the probability density at each point on this triangle.

The Dirichlet distribution defines a probability density for the vector
\(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}\) and is given by \begin{equation}
Dir(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}| \boldsymbol{\alpha})= \frac{1}{Beta(\boldsymbol{\alpha})}\prod_{i=1}^{K}\theta_i^{\alpha_i -1}
\end{equation}

where \(K\) is the number of variables in the vector
\(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}\).

The Dirichlet distribution is parameterised by the vector
\(\boldsymbol{\alpha}\) which has the same number of elements as
\(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}\), that is \(K\).
\(P(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}|\boldsymbol{\alpha})\) can be
interpreted as giving the probability density associated with the
multinomial distribution \(\boldsymbol{\mathbf{\theta}}\) given the
Dirichlet parameter of \(\boldsymbol{\alpha}\).

The Dirichlet distribution is a multivariate generalization of the beta
distribution. The beta distribution is defined in the interval {[}0,1{]}
and has two parameters, \(\alpha\) and \(\beta\). This distribution is a
conjugate prior for the binomial distribution, hence the multivariate
form of the beta - that is the Dirichlet distribution is a prior for the
multivariate form of the binomial distribution, the multinomial
distribution. In \ref{fig:betadist} it can be seen how the distribution
profile is changed depending on the values of \(\alpha\) and \(\beta\).
When these parameters are less than one, it can be seen that the edges
of the distribution are regions with high probability density. In the
context of topic modelling, this can be useful because the samples from
this distribution will be generally from one topic since the extremes of
the distribution can be linked to a topic.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/Beta distribution} 

}

\caption{The beta distribution with different parameters}\label{fig:betadist}
\end{figure}

The Dirichlet distribution can also be visualised where \(K=3\) - in
other words this serves as a toy example where the number of possible
topics for the corpus is 3. This means visualising the distribution on a
triangle simplex for differing values of \(\alpha\) as to investigate
how changing \(\alpha\) changes the probability distribution.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/dirichlet2} 

}

\caption{How the probabiliy distribution for the Dirichlet changes with varying values of alpha}\label{fig:dirivis2}
\end{figure}

In \ref{fig:dirivis2} it can be seen that when \(\alpha_i < 1\), or that
is to say \(\boldsymbol{\alpha} < K\)m high distribution areas are in
the corners of the triangle. the corners of the triangle can be thought
of as a topic, since when sampling from the Dirichlet a topic is being
sampled. As stated above, this is useful because a document is typically
made up of one or two topics in the real, not a mixture of all possible
the topics as would be the assumption if the Dirichlet distribution with
all \(\alpha_i = 1\) would be used, as seen in the second triangle in
\ref{fig:dirivis2}. With the SVD Matrix Factorisation approach described
before with LSA, each document had a value for each topic, so a document
is assumed to be made up of all the topics in the analysis at varying
proportions. LDA has the ability to assume a document is made up a small
number of topics using the Dirichlet distribution, which is a natural
assumption as often pieces of texts only deal with one or two topics,
for example, ``Technology'' and ``Science''.

\hypertarget{dirichlet-in-detail}{%
\subsubsection{3.3.1 Dirichlet in detail}\label{dirichlet-in-detail}}

With LDA, there is a Dirichlet prior on \({\theta}^{(d)} = P(z)\), a
multinomial distribution over topics for document \emph{d}. This is a
conjugate prior for the multinomial. The probability density of a \(T\),
the number of topics, dimensional Dirichlet distribution over the
multinomial distribution \(p=(p_1,...,p_T)\) and is given by:

\begin{equation}
Dir(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_T) =  \frac{\Gamma(\sum_{j}^{}\alpha_j)}{\prod_{j}^{}\Gamma(\alpha_j)}\prod_{j=1}^{T}p_j^{\alpha_j -1}
\end{equation}

The parameters of this distribution are specified by
\(\alpha_1,..\alpha_T\). Each hyperparameter \(\alpha_j\) can be
interpreted as a prior observation count for the number of times topic
\(j\) is sampled in a document before having observed any actual words
from that document. The Dirichlet prior on the topic distribution
\(\theta\) results in a smoothed topic distribution depending on the
\(\alpha\) parameter. This parameter controls the number of topics for
each documents or in other words it controls the probability
distribution of topics for each document. Sampling from the Dirichlet
distribution means getting a multinomial distribution for the topics for
that document. The \(\alpha\) is a hyperparameter, that is a parameter
of parameters, that dictates what the multinomial distribution of topics
looks like for each document. The benefit of the Dirichlet distribution
is that for \(\alpha<1\) the multinomial distribution is often
represented by a few topics. If \(\alpha>1\) the distribution is quite
even - that is the distribution is represented by many topics. It is
more natural to assume a document only contains a few topics, just like
a document in real life. For that reason an \(\alpha<1\) is used in
topic modeling.

A Dirichlet distribution prior is also placed on \(\phi\), the
multinomial probability distribution of words of each of the topics,
using the parameter \(\beta\). It can be interpreted as the prior
observation count on the number of times words are sampled from a topic
before any word from the corpus is observed. Just like the \(\alpha\)
parameter, it controls the word distribution for each topic, either
making the probability distribution uniform or having only a few words
have high probabilities for each topic.

In summary:

The Dirichlet distribution has two parameters:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \(\alpha\) - controls how different the probabilities will be for
  words in the topics.
\item
  \(\beta\) - controls how different the probabilities will be for
  topics in the document.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{plate-notation}{%
\subsection{Plate notation}\label{plate-notation}}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/Box diagram} 

}

\caption{Box diagram}\label{fig:boxdia}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:boxdia} shows a way to graphically represent the LDA
model. Shaded and unshaded areas indicate observed and latent variables
respectively. \(\phi\), the distribution of words in the topics,
\(\theta\), the distribution of topics in each document and \(z\), the
assignment of word tokens to topics are what three latent variables aim
to infer. \(\alpha\) and \(\beta\) are the hyperparameters that are
treated as constants in the model. Arrows represent conditional
dependencies between the variables and the plates, the boxes in the
figure, refer to repetitions of sampling steps with the variable in the
right corner referring to the number of samples. For example, the inner
plate that has the bubbles \(z\) and \(w\) illustrated the repeated
sampling of topics and words until \(N_d\), the number of words in each
document \emph{d}, words have been generated for document \(d\). The
plate surrounding \(\theta^{(d)}\) shows the repeated sampling of a
distribution of topics for each document \(d\) for a total of \(D\)
documents. The plate surrounding \(\phi^{(z)}\) shows the repeated
sampling of word distributions for each topic \(z\) until \(T\)
documents have been generated.

Here is a labeled version of Figure \ref{fig:boxdia}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/plate dia lab} 

}

\caption{Box diagram labeled}\label{fig:platedialab}
\end{figure}

The goal of LDA is to estimate \(\theta\) and \(\phi\). These are latent
variables that aren't observed that the model attempts to fit. These
latent variables are determined by using the words observed in the
corpus, so the document document making process is reverse engineered to
get the parameters that make those observed words. LDA aims to find the
parameters that maximise the likelihood of the words observered in the
corpus.

Unlike statistical models like OLS, there is no analytic solution with
LDA. The best solution can be approximated in an iterative way, using
steps and getting closer to the best solution. One way to do this is
with Gibbs Sampling.

\hypertarget{gibbs-sampling}{%
\subsection{3.4 Gibbs sampling}\label{gibbs-sampling}}

Here is the intuition behind Gibbs sampling. Assume it is known that the
topics of all the words except for the word token of interest. For this
word token of interest, a topic must be chosen from the topic
distribution for the document. The model prefers to choose a topic that
is already present in the document. At the same time, the model also
wants to pick a topic that the word already occurs in. So there are 2
probability distributions: one that favors the topics already present in
the document and one that favors the topics that this word is already
present in.

Taking these two probability distributions together, a joint probability
distribution is gained and will give you the chance of picking a topic
for this one missing word.

Then, using the iterative Gibbs Sampling in this way:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Start with random sampling - assigning every word in every document to
  one topic.
\item
  Then iterate over all the words and all the documents. For each word
  in each document, the proportion of topics is computed in that
  document (disregarding the word itself).
\item
  Compute the proportion of topics for that word (disregarding the word
  itself). I.e what are the topics that the word occurs in and at what
  frequency?
\item
  Multiply these two distributions to get a joint probability
  distribution.
\item
  Choose a new topic from that probability distribution and then update
  the proportions.
\item
  Repeat this step, going to the next word, and eventually to the next
  document, until every word is updated in every document.
\item
  Initially there were completely random distributions, but after these
  steps there are slightly less random distribution because the this
  method, for the words, tends to choose topics that are consistent with
  that document.
\item
  Each time these steps are run a stable solution is moved towards, and
  these steps are run until it converges to a stable solution.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{gibbs-sampling-in-detail}{%
\subsubsection{3.4.1 Gibbs Sampling in
detail}\label{gibbs-sampling-in-detail}}

Gibbs sampling is used. This is a form of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo
sampling method which samples values from high-dimensional
distributions. Gibbs sampling simulates a complex distribution by
sampling over marginal distributions given a specific value of the other
distribution. This is done sequentially until the sampled values
approximate the desired distribution.

The Gibbs procedure considers each word token in a document and
estimates a probability of assigning the current word token to each
topic, conditioned on the topic assignments on the topic assignments to
all the other word tokens. From this conditional distribution, a topic
is sampled and then is the new topic assignment for this word token.
This conditional distribution can be written as:

\begin{equation}
P(z_i=j \mid z_{-i}, w_i, d_i,)
\end{equation}

\(z_i=j\) represents the topic assignment of token \(i\) to topic \(j\),
\(z_{-1}\) refers to the topic assignments of all the other word tokens
and the dot refers to all other known or observed information as such as
all the other word and document indices \(w_{-i}\) and \(d_{-i}\) and
hyperparamters \(\alpha\) and \(\beta\).

This probability is proportional to

\begin{equation}
P(z_i = j | z_{-i}, w_i, d_i, \cdot) \propto \frac{C^{WT}_{w_ij} + \beta}{\sum_{w=1}^{W}C^{WT}_{wj} + W\beta}\frac{C^{DT}_{d_ij} + \alpha}{\sum_{t=1}^{T}C^{DT}_{d_ij} + T\alpha}
\end{equation}

where \(C^{WT}\) and \(C^{DT}\) are matrices of counts, \(C^{WT}_{wj}\)
contains the number of times word \(w\) is assigned to \(j\), not
including the current iteration of \(i\), \(C^{DT}_{dj}\) contains the
number of times topic \(j\) is assigned to some word token in document
\(d\), not including the current iteration \(i\).

Note that equation (4) isn't the actual probability of assigning a word
token to topic \(j\) but it is proportional to the right hand side. The
actual probability is produced by dividing the equation by the sum of
all topics \(T\). The left part of the right hand side of the equation
can be seen as the probability of word \(w\) under topic \(j\). The
right part is the probability that topic \(j\) has under the current
topic distribution for document \(d\).

Because the top of the left part \(C^{WT}_{wj}\) contains the number of
times word \(w\) is assigned to \(j\), it means that when many tokens of
a word have been assigned to topic \(j\) across the documents, it will
increase the probability of assigning any particular token of that word
to topic \(j\).

At the same time, looking at the right part of the right hand side, if
topic \(j\) has been used multiple times in one document, this means a
higher \(C^{DT}_{dj}\), the number of times topic \(j\) is assigned to
some word token in document \(d\), it will increase the probability that
any word from that document will be assigned to topic \(j\).

As a result, words are assigned to topics depending on how likely the
word is for the topic and also how dominant that topic is in a document.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Assign each word token to a random topic.
\item
  Decrease the count matrices \(C^{WT}\) and \(C^{DT}\) by one for the
  entries that correspond to the current topic assignment.
\item
  A new topic is sampled from the distribution in Equation 4 and the
  count matrices \(C^{WT}\) and \(C^{DT}\) are incremented with the new
  topic assignment.
\item
  Repeat these steps for all N word tokens in the corpus, achieving one
  Gibbs sample.
\item
  Repeat steps 1-4 until a stable solution converges - that is the
  posterior distribution over topic assignments are approximated as best
  as possible.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{obtaining-the-topic-and-word-distributions.}{%
\subsubsection{Obtaining the topic and word
distributions.}\label{obtaining-the-topic-and-word-distributions.}}

Recall that:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \({\phi}^{(j)} = P(z=j)\), a multinomial distribution over words for
  topic \emph{j}
\item
  \({\theta}^{(d)} = P(z)\), a multinomial distribution over topics for
  document \emph{d}
\end{itemize}

These can be obtained as follows:

\begin{equation}
{\phi}'^{(j)}_i= \frac{C^{WT}_{ij} + \beta}{\sum_{k=1}^{W}C^{WT}_{kj} + W\beta}
\end{equation} and

\begin{equation}
{\theta}'^{(j)}_j= \frac{C^{DT}_{dj} + \alpha}{\sum_{k=1}^{T}C^{DT}_{dk} + T\alpha}
\end{equation}

\hypertarget{benefits-of-lda}{%
\subsection{3.5 Benefits of LDA}\label{benefits-of-lda}}

LDA adds a Dirichlet prior on top of the data generating process,
meaning NMF qualitatively leads to worse mixtures. It fixes values for
the probability vectors of the multinomials, whereas LDA allows the
topics and words themselves to vary.

Thus, in cases where it is believed that the topic probabilities should
remain fixed per document (oftentimes unlikely) --- or in small data
settings in which the additional variability coming from the hyperpriors
is too much --- NMF performs better. Otherwise, LDA is more suitable to
use.

\hypertarget{aims}{%
\section{4. Aims}\label{aims}}

\hypertarget{motivation-for-and-summary-of-the-project}{%
\subsection{4.1 Motivation for and summary of the
project}\label{motivation-for-and-summary-of-the-project}}

In early 2021, the impact of social media on the stock market gained
notoriety when the price of GameStop (GME) stock went from hovering
around \$20 to reaching the lofty heights of \$347 dollars in just one
month. This increase was attributed to the collective frenzy that took
place on the social media platform of Reddit, specifically the sub-forum
known as ``wallstreetbets'' that encouraged users to buy more stock
which in turn elevated the stock to those high prices.

This was a clear demonstration of how public word-of-mouth can impact
the stock market, but this kind of thing has happened for time
immemorial. Before social media, word-of-mouth opinions about stocks
would have also made an impact on the price of stocks. The difference
now is these opinions are much more visible, and important for this
project, they are recorded.

This project aims to use Topic Modeling on Tweets that refer to the
company Gamestop and the cryptocurrency Bitcoin. Using Topic Modeling,
tweets are classified into groups depending on the topic discussed in
each tweet. It further looks to investigate how these topics of public
opinion influences the price of the assets Gamestop and Bitcoin.

\hypertarget{an-overview-of-the-approach-to-be-taken}{%
\subsection{4.2 An overview of the approach to be
taken}\label{an-overview-of-the-approach-to-be-taken}}

There are two main steps when it comes to approaching this analysis.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Assigning topics to tweets that represent opinions about stocks and
  cryptocurrency.
\item
  Finding the relationship between these opinions and change in asset
  price.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{classifying-postsarticles}{%
\subsubsection{1. Classifying
posts/articles}\label{classifying-postsarticles}}

Reading social media posts gives the reader an understanding of the
opinion and feeling of the public for a particular topic. For example, a
social media poster may simply say \emph{``I believe Bitcoin is going to
be worth £1.2 million one day} and although the poster's believed price
may not be remembered by the reader, the sentiment of the post - that
bitcoin is going to increase in value - will be.

In this example for simplicity and demonstrative purposes, consider
trying to assign tweets to just two topics - ``positive'' or
``negative''; the above example tweet can be classified as a
\emph{``positive''} sentiment for Bitcoin. A post using skeptical
language in regards to bitcoin can be classified as \emph{``negative''}.

A \emph{Probabilistic Topic Modeling} which was applied to machine
learning and outlined by David Blei et al can be used to analysed
posts/articles for the type of language they use regarding a certain
asset at a time point, and the frequency of positive or negative posts
can found for a particular asset. This then gives us a ``sentiment
score'' - telling what is the public opinion of the asset, is it mainly
positive, negative, or equal? This type of analysis is known as
\emph{Natural Language Processing (NLP)}.

Classifying a post/article into positive and negative is a useful way to
gauge public opinion, however, positive and negative posts can be
classified into further topics. For example, how positive is the post,
perhaps the language of the post is hugely positive, so it can be
classified as \emph{``very positive''}. Perhaps the language used is
positive, but tinged with some negativity of skepticism - and this could
be classified as \emph{``weakly positive''}. Further still, within the
trading community there are trading behaviours known as \emph{bearish}
(many people following the trend of selling) and \emph{bullish} (many
people following the trend of buying) and the posts can be further
classified into these groups.

To summarise the above, the use of Topic modeling algorithms analyses
the words of the original texts to uncover the underlying topics that
run through the tweets and how the importance of these topics change
through time depending on when the tweet was posted. This project uses
uses Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to allocate tweets to topics.

\hypertarget{the-data}{%
\subsection{4.3 The Data}\label{the-data}}

Tweets were pulled using the Twitter API. Three hundred tweets were
pulled for each day that contain the terms ``BTC'' or ``Bitcoin'' for
Bitcoin data, and the terms ``GME'' or ``Gamestop'' for the Gamestop
data. This data was pulled for tweets posted from Janurary 1st 2016
until August 31st 2021. The data is extracted as a CSV (comma-separated
values) file.

This data will then be run through an LDATopic Modeling pipeline to find
the underlying topics in these tweets.

\hypertarget{pipeline-architecture}{%
\section{5. Pipeline Architecture}\label{pipeline-architecture}}

All code was written and executed using Python 3.7.

\hypertarget{cleaning}{%
\subsection{5.1 Cleaning}\label{cleaning}}

Before an LDA model can be built the tweets must be ``cleaned''. This
cleaning process is done to remove noise from the tweets so that the
model can uncover the meaning of the tweets more effectively. Before
this cleaning process is undertaken all characters in the corpus are
converted to lowercase and all subsequent filters act independently on
the character's case. Uppercases are used to describe the filters in
this document to fit within the grammatical rules of producing this
report only.

There are two main cleaning steps that were undertaken on the data.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Corpus-wide noise: the removal of tweets that are not relevant to the
  analysis. Examining the tweets uncovered a portion of tweets that
  don't express opinions of people and are most likely tweets by bots.
  Here is an example tweet
\end{enumerate}

\begin{quote}
``Current price: 433.54\$ \$BTCUSD \$btc \#bitcoin 2016-01-02 18:40:05
EST''
\end{quote}

This type of tweet appears multiple time in the dataset and more than
likely is produced by a bot that serves to update users of twitter the
price of bitcoin. There are many tweets such as these that can judged as
being produced by bots and removing them from the data is important
because they don't represent any sentiment of actual humans. These
tweets are considered noise and are removed.

These tweets were found by running the LDA algorithm on the corpus and
exploring the t-SNE plot which shows individual tweets in each topic.
This plot will be discussed later.

If the tweet contained one of the phrases from the following list they
were removed from the corpus and deemed to be an irrelevant tweet. This
does not capture all irrelevant tweets and may delete tweets that were
posted by a human (each filter works independent of whether the
characters are upper or lower case):

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Current price
\item
  Price
\item
  Price update
\item
  Prices update
\item
  Price action
\item
  Price increase
\item
  Price decrease
\item
  Density
\item
  Last hour
\item
  Latest block info
\item
  Closed sell
\item
  Alert
\item
  Hourly update
\item
  \%
\item
  Removal of tweets that contain ten or more digits. These tweets were
  observed to be produced by bots reporting statistical data about
  bitcoin.
\end{itemize}

The removal of these tweets means that the sentiment of the users of
Twitter can be more effectively investigated.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\setcounter{enumi}{1}
\tightlist
\item
  Removal of within document noise. For example, a word which appears in
  the data may be presented like this ``\#hate''. This phrase carries
  the same meaning as the word hate phrased as this ``hate''. In this
  example, the hashtag is removed from ``\#hate'' and the word is saved
  in the tweet as ``hate''. As explained previously, Topic Model
  algorithms depend on the frequency of words in the corpus. It would
  not be accurate to consider ``\#hate'' and ``hate'' as two separate
  frequencies.
\end{enumerate}

For the statistical analysis, ``\#hate'' and ``hate'' will be grouped
together because they are exactly the same in terms of their sentiment,
and this is important because topic modelling's purpose is to group
tweets based on similarities within those tweets and the way to pick up
that similarity is by seeing if tweets have the same words inside them.
The algorithm has no way of knowing if ``\#hate'' and ``hate'' are the
same word. For that characters such as hashtags are removed from the
tweets, amongst other characters that will be explained further.

The following cleaning of characters were undertaken for each tweet.
using regular expressions:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Conversion of html escapes to characters, for example conversion of
  ``\&'' to ``\&''.
\item
  Removal of html tags. For example ``'' is .
\item
  Removal of markdown URLs, for example: \href{https://....}{Some text}
\item
  Removal of text or code in square brackets.
\item
  Removal of sequences of special character, for example ``\&\#'' is
  removed.
\item
  Removal of sequences of hyphens such as --- or ==
\item
  Removal of sequences of white spaces
\item
  Removal of \#
\item
  Removal of \$ (this charatcer is used as a cashtag, similar to a
  hashtag)
\end{itemize}

Using the python package ``Textacy'' normalisation was executed on the
corpus. Normalisation is a process that transforms text into its
canonical form. For example, the word ``bóat'' with an accent would be
converted to ``boat'' without an accent.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Normalize words in the document that have been split across lines by a
  hyphen for visual consistency (aka hyphenated) by joining the pieces
  back together, sans hyphen and whitespace.
\item
  Normalize all ``fancy'' single- and double-quotation marks in text to
  just the basic ASCII equivalents.
\item
  Normalize unicode characters in the document into canonical forms.
\item
  Remove accents from any accented unicode characters in text, either by
  replacing them with ASCII equivalents or removing them entirely.
\end{itemize}

The following words are removed from each document as they are synomyms
for the word Bitcoin and don't carry any sentiment. The decision to
remove these was made by observing the result of the topic model and
observing these words having high importance in topics:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  BTC
\item
  Bitcoin
\item
  Crypto
\item
  Cryptocurrency
\item
  Coin
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{remove-stop-words}{%
\subsection{5.1.1 5. Remove ``Stop words''}\label{remove-stop-words}}

These are commonly used words in English that don't carry little to no
information. Words such as ``The'' or ``a'' are filtered out. This
removes noise from the data in order for the algorithm to give more
focus to the more meaningful words.

\hypertarget{lemmatisation}{%
\subsection{5.1.2 Lemmatisation}\label{lemmatisation}}

In addition to removal of special characters to ensure words with the
same meaning are the same, the syntax of a word is cleaned. A short
example of this is, the phrase ``buy'' and ``bought'' carry the same
meaning - they just refer to different moments of time, the present and
past respectively. For that reasons these words should appear the same
for the algorithm as they carry exactly the same sentiment and meaning;
they will be both classed as the present ``buy''. This helps the
algorithm give the same meaning to tweets that use words that only
differ by their grammar (such as past, present, future, gerund, past
participle). It seeks to make each word be independent of its
grammatical version.

\hypertarget{tokenisation}{%
\subsection{5.1.3 Tokenisation}\label{tokenisation}}

This process is the separation of the tweet into single words, and these
words are known as ``tokens'', so the LDA algorithm can determine where
each word starts and ends. This is necessary for the algorithm to
analyse the data.

\hypertarget{n-grams-including-phrases}{%
\subsection{5.1.4 n-grams: Including
phrases}\label{n-grams-including-phrases}}

This joins two or three (bigram or trigram, respectively) tokens
together to form a two or three token phrase. If a two or three word
phrase appears of often in the tweets, specifically if they appear more
than 30 times, they are included in the dictionary which is used in the
LDA algorithm. This is important because some words when joined together
contain a very different meaning. For example, the phrase
``money-hungry'' gives a different meaning to the document than if the
words ``money'' and ``hungry'' were to be used separately.

\hypertarget{filtering-tokens-that-exhibit-extreme-frequencies}{%
\subsection{5.1.5 Filtering tokens that exhibit extreme
frequencies}\label{filtering-tokens-that-exhibit-extreme-frequencies}}

If a word appears only 5 times in the whole corpus, it is removed from
the dictionary. If a word appears in eighty percent or more of the
tweets, it is also removed from the dictionary. Since these words are
removed, they are then not used in the LDA algorithm.

Words that are very frequent or not very frequent are not relevant to
the analysis because if they appear very frequently, then they're not a
good way to distinguish between topics. If they don't appear frequently
documents won't have these words in common and simply adds to the noise
of the data.

\hypertarget{further-data-pre-processing-steps}{%
\section{5.2 Further data pre-processing
steps}\label{further-data-pre-processing-steps}}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Create a dictionary - This is the list of all the words in the corpus
  (all the documents).
\item
  Create Bag of Words for each document - This is gives a unique number
  ID to each word in each tweet, accompanied with the frequency of that
  word in the document. This is necessary since the algorithm will
  process the documents using ID number of each words and their
  frequencies.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{running-the-lda-algorithm}{%
\section{5.3 Running the LDA
Algorithm}\label{running-the-lda-algorithm}}

Using two packaes known as Gensim and LDA Mallet, the model is run
through the LDA algorithm using the pre-processed data and using a
\(\beta\) parameter of 0.01 and an \(\alpha\) parameter of
\(\frac{5}{T}\) where T denotes the number of topics specified in the
algorithm.

\hypertarget{evaluatiing-the-best-number-of-topics}{%
\subsection{5.4 Evaluatiing the Best Number of
Topics}\label{evaluatiing-the-best-number-of-topics}}

The LDA model requires that the statistician inputs the number of topics
that the corpus should be split into. Since the actual number of topics
is hard to discern from such a large corpus of tweets, way to
mathematically ascertain the best number of topics is necessary.
Choosing the right number of topics for the model to output is important
because if too many are chosen those superfluous topics won't make
sense. Equally if too few are chosen the model would miss topics which
might be important to the statistician. Topic models make no guarantee
on the interpretability of their output nor their topics.

The overall aim of evaluating a topic model is seeing if the outputted
topics tell a good story and if the topics are well-defined. One way of
doing that is called a ``Word Intrusion'' test. This is a test based on
a human observers. For each topic, the list of the most probable words
in that topic are presented to an observer, with one important word in
that topic substituted with a word that has a high-probability from
another topic.

Given is a toy example that describes the ``Word Instruson'' test

Original Topic top 5 most important words : car, boot, window, drive,
road Original Topic with Word Intrusion: car, boot, banana (word
intruder), window, drive, road

If the human observer can identify the word intruder, then the original
list of most important words for that topic makes sense and therefore
the topic is well defined. If the observer can't identify the intruding
word then the original topic's list of most important words doesn't make
sense because it means the word intruder looks as good as the words in
the topic before, which suggests that the topic's important words are
defined at random. Tt suggests that the number of topics the user chose
as a parameter should be changed.

This Word-Instrusion test is a measure of topic ``Coherence''. Coherence
in this context is a measure of how much the documents support each
other - or in other words how well the topics resemble an actual topic
that human labels it as a distinct topic. These human-based measures
serve as a gold standard for coherence evaluation. However, they are
expensive to produce and therefore a statistical based measure is called
for.

There are several popular coherence measures used in Topic Modeling with
UMass being a popular metric. This measure correlates well the the human
based word intrusion measure. UMass calculates the correlation of words
in a given document based on conditional probability. It takes the set
of \(N\) most important words of a topic and sums a \textbf{confirmation
measure} over all the word pairs in the set. This confirmation measure
takes a pair of words or word subsets as well as the corresponding word
probabilities to compute how strong one set of words supports the other.
This score measures how much, within the words used to describe a topic,
a common word is on average a good predictor for a less common word. The
confirmation measure is given by:

\begin{equation}
C_{UMass} = \frac{2}{N\cdot(N-1) } \sum_{i=2}^{N}\sum_{j=1}^{i=1}log\frac{P(w_i,w_j)+\epsilon }{P(w_j)}
\end{equation}

Ths sum of this gives the UMass Coherence score. Models are run for each
unique value of number of topics \(k\in[5,45]\), where k is the number
of topics. It is computationally expensive to run the models therefore
the number of topics has been constrained to this set. The model with
the lowest Coherence UMass scored is considered as the best model with k
being the best number of topics.

\url{https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2015/WSDM_Topic_Evaluation/public.pdf}
{[}temporary{]}

A paper (above) compared many different coherence measures by looking at
their correlations with human based measures of topic models. The best
performing coherence measure was found to be newly proposed measure.
This measure, \(C_V\) combines the indirect cosine measure with the NPMI
and the boolean sliding window. See
\url{https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2015/WSDM_Topic_Evaluation/public.pdf}
for more detail.

This score ranges from zero to one with one being being perfect
coherence. Like the UMass score, multiple models will be run for each
value for the number of topics and the value closest to one will be
considered as the best number of topics to use. Although it is also
important that the topic makes sense for a human and therefore these
topics were analysed such that words in the topics were judged by the
human to belong together.

\hypertarget{visualisation}{%
\section{6 Visualisation}\label{visualisation}}

\hypertarget{ldavis}{%
\subsection{6.1 LDAvis}\label{ldavis}}

Visualizing the result of a topic model is difficult since LDA since the
fitted model has many dimensions - the LDA model is applied to thousands
of documents, modeled as many topics, and these topics are modeled as
distributions over many words. Using a pakacge called pyLDAvis, the
result of the topic model can be visualised in a user-friendly way.

The left pane of the visualisation shows the whole view of the topic
model, showing how prevalent each topic is and how the topics relate to
each other. Each topic is a circle in a two-dimensional plane. Their
positions are determined by computing the distance between topics and
also using multidimensional scaling to project the inter-topic distances
onto two dimensions (done in (Chuang et al., 2012a)). The prevalence of
a topic is represented by the area of its circle.

The right hand panel shows a bar chart, showing the most ``useful''
words for a topic highlighted on the left panel. This intends to show
the meaning of the topic. The bars show two overlaid bars per word - the
topic-specific frequency of a word (red) and the corpus-wide frequency
of the word (blue). Selecting a word on the right changes the size of
circles of the topics on the left - with the sizes of the circles
representing the conditional distribution over topics of the chosen
word.

\hypertarget{useful-words}{%
\subsubsection{6.1.1 ``Useful'' words}\label{useful-words}}

In order to observe a topic meaning, a ranked list of the most probable
terms in that topic. The issue with investigating topics like this is
that common words in the corpus occur in the ranked list of multiple
topics which in turn makes it hard to differentiate meanings of these
topics. In order to resolve this issue Bischof and Airoldi (2012)
suggested ranking terms for a given topic by using the frequency of the
term in that topic and the exclusivity of the term to the topic. The
exclusivity takes into account how many times the term appears in that
topic to the exclusion of others. This metric is defined as
``usefulness'' and pyLDAvis uses a similar measure called ``relevance''
to rank terms in order of ``usefulness''. Relevance is defined as:

\begin{equation}
r(w,k|\lambda)=\lambda log(\phi_kw) + (1-\lambda)log(\frac{\phi_kw}{p_w})
\end{equation}

where \(\phi_kw\) denotes the probability of term
\(w\in \left \{ 1,...,V \right \}\) for topic
\(k\in \left \{ 1,...,K \right \}\) where \(V\) denotes the number of
terms in the vocabulary. Also, \(p_w\) denotes the marginal probability
of term \(w\) in the corpus. \(\lambda\) determines the weight given to
the proability of term \(w\) under topic \(k\) relative to to its lift.
Lift is defined as the ratio of a term's probability within a topic to
its marginal probability across the corpus, which can be seen as the
subject of the log function. Setting \(\lambda =1\) results in ranking
the terms in a topic by their topic-specific probability. Setting
\(\lambda=0\) ranks the terms soley by their lift.

A study was carried out with humans to see what the optimal value of
\(\lambda\) was. (temporary, from here
\url{https://nlp.stanford.edu/events/illvi2014/papers/sievert-illvi2014.pdf}).
Using documents that have been assigned topics (ground truth), subjects
were asked to assign a list of words to a topic - with the list of words
coming from topics made from a topic model. The list of words presented
to the subjects were made with varying values of \(\lambda\) and the
relationship between accuracy rate assigment of the list of words to a
topic and values of \(\lambda\) was explored. The study found that the
optimal value fo \(\lambda\) was 0.6 (no confidence interval given)
yielding 70\% probability of correct topic identification.

\hypertarget{t-sne}{%
\subsection{6.2 t-SNE}\label{t-sne}}

Another useful visusaltion of topic models is known as t-SNE. It stands
for ``t distributed Stoachastic Neighbourhood Embedding'' and was
developed in 2008. This is an unsupervised non-parametric method of
dimensionality reduction, similir to the left hand pane of the LDAvis.
It's useful in separating data that cannot be separated by any straight
line. ``t-SNE'' preserves the local structure in the data suc hthat
points that are close together in high dimensions will also be close
together when the dimensions are reduced by the algorithm to just two
dimensions.

It's useful for visualisation since, with Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), a popular dimension reducing algorithm, the global structure of
the data is preserved. PCA concerns itself with the direction in which
the variance is maximises and it doesn't take into account the distance
between individual points. t-SNE on the other hand concerns itself with
the local structure and preserves the both the local and global
structure of the data. This is importance when displaying topic models
since it makes sense that similar documents be close together. It's also
good art handing non-linear data. PCA is a linear algorithm; creating
components which are the linear combination of existing feature. This
means it's not able to interpret polynomial relationships between
features. t-SNE is capable of working with non-linear data however in
t-SNE is computationally complex and expensive.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section{7. Results}\label{results}}

\hypertarget{best-coherence-score}{%
\subsection{7.1 Best Coherence Score}\label{best-coherence-score}}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/Best_coherenceU_mass} 

}

\caption{Plot of UMass Coherence score over the number of topics outputted}\label{fig:cohumass}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{images/Best_coherenceC_v} 

}

\caption{Plot of UMass Coherence score over the number of topics outputted}\label{fig:cohcv}
\end{figure}

\(C_V\) shows best score is 18

\hypertarget{topics-with-the-most-important-words}{%
\subsection{7.2 Topics with the most important
words}\label{topics-with-the-most-important-words}}

\begin{table}

\caption{\label{tab:topictable}Topics and their top 30 most important words, ordered by importance}
\centering
\begin{tabular}[t]{l|l}
\hline
Topic & Term\\
\hline
Topic 0 & people,           thing,          mining,            make,              nt,      understand,             man,            work,            call,            live,           trust,           order,        question,            mind,         imagine,             lot,           leave,              ai,          pretty,           place,          bubble,             ass,            hate,       important,            true,          energy,conceive\_believe,        mind\_man,            sign,          simple\\
\hline
Topic 1 & year,          network,             feel,           system,             give,         year\_ago,        feel\_like,           create,            miner,            power,             miss,             turn,              ago,            large,         increase,             plan,            trump,             test,           wealth,            great,              key,lightning\_network,         computer,            major,        lightning,         protocol,              nft,             node,              day,           secure\\
\hline
Topic 10 & buy,       gon\_na,         sell,         shit,       change,      buy\_dip,         life,           na,          gon,          lol,       friend,          dip,         fuck,  change\_life,       invest,      fucking,      success,        cheap,        stack,marine\_strive,success\_value,          sat,         moon,         pick,     solution,       listen,       family,    portfolio,     leverage,       school\\
\hline
Topic 11 & win\_play,     long,     play,     game,      win,      run,     stop,long\_term,     bull, bull\_run,   expect,      set,     easy, continue,   moment,   chance,     stay,     term,     hodl,     fail,   decide,  thought,     hand,   launch,   choose,    party,    wanna,    dream,  ltc\_bch,       8k\\
\hline
Topic 12 & good,   look\_like,         day,         low,       month,       break,        high,       stock,         guy,stock\_market,       chart,        move,       reach,        nice,         ath,   month\_low,      market,      target,        head,       today,  resistance,       happy,        usdt,       check,     weekend,       rally,     morning,       enjoy,     binance,         pop\\
\hline
Topic 13 & hour,                 cash,                  fee,                 send,          transaction,               wallet,             rate\_sit,                 rate,                block,                  sit,                 sell,             hour\_fee,                vbyte,broadcast\_transaction,            hour\_lull,               update,               get\_ta,                 half,        winkdex\_price,       update\_current,                chain,            block\_fee,                 cost,               minute,             transfer,                   ta,             donation,                 pass,                 lull,              address\\
\hline
Topic 14 & time,        hit,     happen,        end,bear\_market,      watch,       drop,       bear,        big,      ready,       hope,   remember,       rise,       high, toggle\_rig, suffer\_hit,       home,       past,   tomorrow,         wo,        bit,      start,      crazy,     bounce,        10k,     forget,        rig,       dead,    finally,      guess\\
\hline
Topic 15 & start,                pay,             accept,            payment,          blackjack,blackjack\_blackjack,               fast,               free,            million,          developer,               find,             paypal,               card,       thank\_follow,              offer,                bet,               tech,                hey,              fight,            company,              smart,               king,               hear,              check,             online,              issue,             casino,               earn,           purchase,               site\\
\hline
Topic 16 & pump,            dump,          profit,          follow,         satoshi,             lot,       community,           learn,           early,satoshi\_nakamoto,           bring,           build,           share,            find,            pair,            case,           range,          reward,           state,         min\_arb,    yield\_profit,   exchange\_pair,           block,          supply,             arb,           email,           light,           forex,            baby,         release\\
\hline
Topic 17 & currency,          market,           trade,            doge,         bullish,            scam,            idea,       doge\_doge,   current\_value,       market\_1h,          signal,             usd,        exchange,      buy\_signal,             buy,        analysis,      trade\_idea,report\_technical,         bearish,            rich,     utc\_bullish,             dip,      dip\_detect,           whale,         binance,          report,           enter,       technical,            fake,       timeframe\\
\hline
Topic 2 & day,        invest,    market\_cap,        market,    investment,         world,           big,        people,        volume,          real,      business,          fall,      internet,          hard,           cap,          fact,        reason,          care,           fun,       history,       finance,         space,        person,         spend,    24h\_volume,       explain,          sale,   wall\_street,         drive,volume\_advance\\
\hline
Topic 3 & blockchain,          ethereum,          currency,               ico,           project,           digital,             token,             asset,               eth,              work,        technology,              team,    smart\_contract,      asset\_switch,              user,     ico\_crowdsale,          platform,           company,ethereum\_tokensale,        proof\_work,       interesting,           fintech,             great,          security,   protect\_digital,       sell\_autumn,     digital\_asset,           protect,         tokensale,             smart\\
\hline
Topic 4 & money,         today,    marine\_mtc,          lose,        marine,          time,           alt,           bad,      currency,           mtc,           buy,    lose\_money,          open,        dollar,       convert,    waste\_time,      interest,         event,          save,           hot,money\_interest,revolution\_buy,      bad\_lose,    revolution,   event\_occur,         waste,   convert\_mtc,  marine\_2015s, today\_convert,      standard\\
\hline
Topic 5 & news,           love,          worth,           talk,        twitter,          close,             rt,        account,         number,currently\_worth,            usd,          daily,    store\_value,    usd\_goldjar,           post,        service,         follow,          great,          china, website\_number,          store,    daily\_close,           late,         google,          np\_rt,          video,           hack,        website,        airdrop,       follower\\
\hline
Topic 6 & alt,        eth,        xrp,   currency,   ethereum,        ltc,       lite,     ripple,bull\_market,    eth\_ltc,        bch,      crash,    economy,       moon,        ada,       hodl,       gain,        trx,       hard,    binance, alt\_season,        xlm,        neo,       defi,        bnb,       tron,       dash,        eos,       fork,       link\\
\hline
Topic 7 & price,        current\_price,                 wait,           prediction,              current,                 join,                trend,     trend\_prediction,               status,                  min,              channel,                  sec,                   pm,             telegram,        join\_telegram,            sec\_price,     telegram\_channel,               strong,    status\_prediction,     channel\_accurate,               min\_pm,           zone\_price,              support,          status\_wait,                  etf,             accurate,                 zone,            elon\_musk,prediction\_prediction,          price\_trend\\
\hline
Topic 8 & exchange,                    future,                       usd,                      bank,                      gold,              exchange\_usd,                  currency,             average\_price,                     world,                      fiat,                   average,                government,                      base,                 financial,              central\_bank,                   control,average\_price\_exchange\_usd,       twitterbot\_currency,             marine\_future,                   country,               gold\_silver,                   problem,               credit\_card,                   amazing,                   central,                   freedom,                    global,                     quote,                    credit,                twitterbot\\
\hline
Topic 9 & short,       week,    trading,       hold,      tweet, short\_term,   investor,     trader,      level,play\_expert,       term,        add,       base,        bag,       fund,     candle,    support,       risk,      wrong,   position,       read,     expert,     medium,       free,       fomo,      green,       line,      point,       long,         dm\\
\hline
\end{tabular}
\end{table}

\hypertarget{example-documents-for-each-topic}{%
\subsection{7.3 Example documents for each
topic}\label{example-documents-for-each-topic}}

\hypertarget{word-clouds}{%
\section{7.4 Word Clouds}\label{word-clouds}}

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_0.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_1.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_2.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_3.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_4.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_5.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_6.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_7.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_8.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_9.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_10.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_11.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_12.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_13.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_14.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_15.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_16.png}

\pagebreak

\includegraphics{images/03 - Topic_17.png}

\pagebreak

\hypertarget{rubbish---notes}{%
\section{RUBBISH - NOTES}\label{rubbish---notes}}

\url{https://nlp.stanford.edu/events/illvi2014/papers/sievert-illvi2014.pdf}
conducted a user study to determine whether there was an optimal value
of lamba from the definition of relevance. r

pyLDAvis

DONT USE A high UMass measure would indicate that the topics are well
defined.

Another coherence measure was proposed
\url{https://svn.aksw.org/papers/2015/WSDM_Topic_Evaluation/public.pdf}
which is a unifying framework which combines different coherence
measures into one score. It works as follows.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{S - Segmentation} : Divide a word set (such as the top most
  probable words in a topic) into smaller pieces, such as a set of
  pairs. This is a set of different kinds of segmentations
\item
  \textbf{M - Confirmation Measure} : The set of conffirmation measure
  that scores the agreement of a given pair, for example UMass
\item
  \textbf{P - Word probabilities} : These can be computed i ndifferent
  ways so P serves as a set of ways the word probabilities are
  calculated.
\item
  \textbf{Epsilon - Aggregate}: This is a set of aggregration functions
  which determine how to aggregate scaalr values.
\end{enumerate}

DONT USE END

There are several methods to use statistical measures to determine the
ideal number of topics. One such method is known as the Coherence Score,
where a high score represesents.

To find the best Coherence Scrore, a model was built for each n, number
of topics. For example, to investigate the best number of topics, a
model is first built using the parameter n = 3, 3 topics, and the
coherence score is obtained. This process is repeated for n = 4, up
until n = 30 and the highest coherence score amongst these models
indicates the ideal number of topics.

Cv has issues, as stated herehttps://palmetto.demos.dice-research.org/ 2
issues \url{https://github.com/dice-group/Palmetto/issues/13}

i think umass doesnt use wikipedia, but hte rest doesnt. so that makes
me think dont use the wikipedia one because these topics are so granular
\url{http://qpleple.com/topic-coherence-to-evaluate-topic-models/}

\url{https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/375062/how-does-topic-coherence-score-in-lda-intuitively-makes-sense}
more explanation

RUBBISH END

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section{References}\label{references}}

\end{document}
